[blog] Add "Serving Hybrid Models at Scale in llm-d" blog post (#359)
llm-d/llm-d.github.io: blog/2026-06-13_serving-hybrid-models-at-scale-in-llm-d.md

---
title: "Serving Hybrid Models at Scale in llm-d"

> description: "llm-d extends vLLM's Hybrid Memory Allocator across KV offloading to CPU and storage and KV-aware routing, making the offload connector HMA-aware - for 1.8–2.0x faster KV loads and about 115% higher throughput at high request rates with stable latency."

Reviewer: nit: the description here says "1.8–2.0x faster KV loads" but later in the results section the text says "1.8x to 1.9x faster"...  might want to align these so the preview blurb matches the actual numbers in the post.

Author: Thanks, good catch, forgot to update it

slug: serving-hybrid-models-at-scale-in-llm-d
date: 2026-06-13T09:00

authors:
  - kfirtoledo
  - orozeri
  - dannyharnik
  - itayetelis
  - rachelbrill
  - maroonayoub

tags: [blog, kv-cache, storage, hma, inference, scheduling]
---

# Serving Hybrid Models at Scale in llm-d

For most of the transformer era, the KV cache rested on a quiet assumption: **one model, one uniform cache**. Every layer attended the same way, every block was the same size, and everything built on top of the cache (allocators, offload connectors, schedulers) could treat it as a single pool.

> Hybrid models broke this assumption. Most of today's new cutting-edge models opt for mixing attention types within a single model (full attention next to sliding-window, linear, or Mamba layers), making the cache heterogeneous: different layers now hold different amounts of state, in different shapes, with different reuse rules. A cache block that used to be allocated as one uniform unit is now constituted of several distinct parts.

Reviewer 2: Soften the "most cutting-edge models" claim, better align with vLLM's framing 
https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/design/hybrid_kv_cache_manager/

"Many recent frontier and open-weight models increasingly mix attention types.."

Author: Done

> For most of the transformer era, the KV cache rested on a quiet assumption: **one model, one uniform cache**. Every layer attended the same way, every block was the same size, and everything built on top of the cache (allocators, offload connectors, schedulers) could treat it as a single pool.
> 
> Hybrid models broke this assumption. Many recent frontier and open-weight models increasingly mix attention types within a single model (full attention next to sliding-window, linear, or Mamba layers), making the cache heterogeneous: different layers now hold different amounts of state, in different shapes, with different reuse rules. A cache block that used to be allocated as one uniform unit is now constituted of several distinct parts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For most of the transformer era, the KV cache rested on a quiet assumption: **one model, one uniform cache**. Every layer attended the same way, every block was the same size, and everything built on top of it - allocators, offload connectors, schedulers - could treat the cache as a single pool.

Hybrid models broke this assumption. A growing share of recent frontier and open-weight models mix attention types within a single network, placing full attention next to sliding-window, linear, or Mamba layers. That makes the cache heterogeneous: its layers no longer hold the same amount of state, in the same shape, under the same reuse rules. A block that was once allocated as one uniform unit is now several distinct parts.
```

> To serve a hybrid model efficiently, an AI inference platform has to handle that heterogeneity in at least **three aspects of the stack**:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To serve a hybrid model efficiently, an AI inference platform has to handle that heterogeneity in at least **three layers of the stack**:
```

> * **GPU Memory Allocation**: How the cache is laid out and allocated on the GPU. vLLM solved this with its Hybrid Memory Allocator (HMA), rebuilt around a unified allocator (see [Hybrid Models as First-Class Citizens in vLLM](https://pytorch.org/blog/hybrid-models-as-first-class-citizens-in-vllm/)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **GPU memory allocation** - how the cache is laid out on the GPU. vLLM solved this with its Hybrid Memory Allocator (HMA), rebuilt around a unified allocator (see [Hybrid Models as First-Class Citizens in vLLM](https://pytorch.org/blog/hybrid-models-as-first-class-citizens-in-vllm/)).
```

> * **KV Offloading**: Extending the KV cache to CPU and storage. Without HMA awareness, an offloading connector turns the HMA off and therefore discards the GPU memory improvements or potential data movement savings.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **KV offloading** - extending the cache to CPU and storage. An offloading connector that is not HMA-aware falls back to disabling HMA, discarding the memory and data-movement savings it would otherwise deliver.
```

> * **KV-Aware Routing**: Sending each request to the right model-server replica. Ignoring hybrid memory structure may erroneously list nodes as having or not having the required KV data based on information stemming from just part of the layers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **KV-aware routing** - sending each request to the right model-server replica. A scheduler blind to hybrid structure can misjudge which replica holds a prefix, reading only part of the layers and counting a hit as a miss or the reverse.
```

> This post describes how we extended the vLLM solution for GPU memory handling also to KV offloading and routing. By doing so, **llm-d's tiered KV cache management** significantly improves throughput and latency at high rates.

Reviewer 2: I think the last paragraph should explain a bit better what llm-d brings.
I suggests - 
vLLM's HMA solved hybrid GPU allocation inside a single instance. This post shows how llm-d extends that into tiered KV cache management - offloading to CPU and storage, and routing requests to the replica that holds the right prefix - significantly improving throughput and latency at scale.

Author: Done

> vLLM's HMA solved hybrid GPU memory allocation inside a single instance. This post shows how llm-d extends that into **tiered KV cache management** - offloading to CPU and storage, and routing each request to the replica that already holds its prefix - significantly improving throughput and latency at scale.

Reviewer 4: Made more concise and some little changes: 

vLLM's HMA solved hybrid GPU memory allocation when handling a single vLLM instance. This post shows how llm-d extends that to **tiered KV cache management** - including KV offloading to CPU and storage, and KV-aware request routing - significantly improving throughput and latency at scale for hybrid models.

Author: Done

<!-- truncate -->

## KV Cache Offloading for Hybrid Models

> The KV cache grows linearly with sequence length, and the workloads people actually run now (agentic loops, multi-turn conversations, long reasoning traces) push context lengths into the thousands of tokens. At those sizes, the KV cache is one of the largest consumers of GPU memory. KV offloading extends this cache by using CPU DRAM and even storage, to keep more KV data available for **reuse across requests**. Our KV offloading path builds on the [vLLM native offloading connector](https://blog.vllm.ai/2026/01/08/kv-offloading-connector.html) and [llm-d storage offloading](/blog/native-kv-cache-offloading-to-any-file-system-with-llm-d).

Reviewer 2: The section opens by saying the KV cache grows linearly with sequence length, but then describes sliding-window and Mamba layers where it doesn't ..I hthink it is worth making the hybrid behavior explicit upfront.

In full-attention layers, the KV cache grows linearly with sequence length, and the workloads people actually run now (agentic loops, multi-turn conversations, long reasoning traces)  push context lengths into the thousands of tokens. At those sizes, the KV cache is one of the largest consumers of GPU memory. Hybrid models complicate this: sliding-window layers keep only a fixed-size window of KV state, and Mamba/SSM-style and linear-attention layers keep recurrent or fixed-size state rather than a standard per-token KV stream. Each layer type has a different memory footprint and different offloading behavior. KV offloading extends the cache by spilling to CPU DRAM and storage, keeping more KV data available for reuse across requests - but doing so correctly for hybrid models requires offloading logic that is aware of these per-layer differences. Our KV offloading path builds on the vLLM native offloading connector and llm-d storage offloading.

Author: Done

> In full-attention layers, the KV cache grows linearly with sequence length, and the workloads people actually run now (agentic loops, multi-turn conversations, long reasoning traces) push context lengths into the thousands of tokens. At those sizes, the KV cache is one of the largest consumers of GPU memory. Hybrid models complicate this: sliding-window layers keep only a fixed-size window of KV state, while Mamba/SSM-style and linear-attention layers keep recurrent or fixed-size state rather than a standard per-token KV stream. Each layer type has a different memory footprint and different offloading behavior. KV offloading extends the cache by spilling to CPU DRAM and even storage, keeping more KV data available for **reuse across requests** - but doing so correctly for hybrid models requires offloading logic aware of these per-layer differences. Our KV offloading path builds on the [vLLM native offloading connector](https://blog.vllm.ai/2026/01/08/kv-offloading-connector.html) and [llm-d storage offloading](/blog/native-kv-cache-offloading-to-any-file-system-with-llm-d).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In full-attention layers, the KV cache grows linearly with sequence length, and the workloads that now dominate production - agentic loops, multi-turn conversations, long reasoning traces - push context lengths into the hundreds of thousands of tokens. At that scale, the KV cache becomes one of the largest consumers of GPU memory. Hybrid models change its shape: sliding-window layers retain only a fixed-size window, while Mamba/SSM-style and linear-attention layers keep recurrent or fixed-size state instead of a per-token stream. Each layer type therefore has its own memory footprint and its own ideal offloading behavior. KV offloading relieves the pressure by spilling the cache to CPU DRAM and even storage, keeping more of it available for **reuse across requests** - but for hybrid models, doing this correctly means the offloading logic has to respect those per-layer differences. Our KV offloading path builds on the [vLLM native offloading connector](https://blog.vllm.ai/2026/01/08/kv-offloading-connector.html) and [llm-d storage offloading](/blog/native-kv-cache-offloading-to-any-file-system-with-llm-d) - extending both to handle the per-group structure of hybrid models.
```

### Handling KV Data for Hybrid Models

> Hybrid models interleave different attention types across layers, and each type stores state differently. Take for example gpt-oss-120b which we use throughout this blog as a concrete example (though the connector handles any hybrid model): This model interleaves between Full Attention layers (FA) and Sliding Window layers (SWA). Its full-attention layers cache every token, so a 100K-token request holds all 100K tokens of KV in these layers, while its sliding-window layers keep only the last 128 tokens, no matter how long the request runs. Two layer types in one model, with cache footprints that can differ by **orders of magnitude**.

Reviewer 2: interleaves between --> interleaves
Take,
Parentheses
Fixed - 
Hybrid models interleave different attention types across layers, and each type stores state differently. Take, for example, gpt-oss-120b, which we use throughout this blog as a concrete example, though the connector handles any hybrid model. This model interleaves Full Attention layers (FA) and Sliding Window layers (SWA).

Author: Done

> Hybrid models interleave different attention types across layers, and each type stores state differently. Take, for example, gpt-oss-120b, which we use throughout this blog as a concrete example, though the connector handles any hybrid model. This model interleaves Full Attention layers (FA) and Sliding Window layers (SWA). Its full-attention layers cache every token, so a 100K-token request holds all 100K tokens of KV in these layers, while its sliding-window layers keep only the last 128 tokens, no matter how long the request runs. Two layer types in one model, with cache footprints that can differ by **orders of magnitude**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Hybrid models interleave attention types across layers, and each type stores its state differently. We use gpt-oss-120b throughout this post as a concrete example, though the connector handles any hybrid model. It interleaves full-attention (FA) and sliding-window (SWA) layers: the full-attention layers cache every token, so a 128K-token request holds all 128K tokens of KV, while the sliding-window layers keep only the last 128 tokens, no matter how long the request runs. Two layer types in one model, with cache footprints that differ by **orders of magnitude**.
```

> Frontier models keep diverging from uniform full attention models. Mamba and linear-attention layers (Jamba, Qwen3.5) hold a single fixed-size state instead of per-token KV. In such models, rather than keeping a KV stream, checkpoints of intermediate states are maintained and offloaded. New models like Google's Gemma 4 interleave two types of attention, local sliding-window and full global. [DeepSeek V4](https://vllm.ai/blog/2026-04-24-deepseek-v4) goes furthest, mixing compressed attention at two ratios with a short sliding window inside a single model built for million-token context, a five-way cache stack that vLLM folds into a handful of shared page-size buckets just to serve it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
gpt-oss is one of the simpler cases. Mamba and linear-attention layers (Jamba, Qwen3.5) replace per-token KV with a single recurrent state that the connector checkpoints and offloads; Google's Gemma 4 interleaves local sliding-window and full global attention; and [DeepSeek V4](https://vllm.ai/blog/2026-04-24-deepseek-v4) goes furthest, stacking compressed attention at two ratios alongside a short sliding window for million-token context - five cache types that vLLM folds into a handful of shared page-size buckets just to serve.
```

Reducing repetition in this section relative to the entire blog.

> With the Hybrid Memory Allocator (**HMA**) enabled, vLLM splits the cache into groups – each group has a uniform attention type and is managed separately. KV data for "old tokens" in a sliding-window group may be evicted, whereas in a full-sequence group these have to be maintained for the entire prompt. For gpt-oss-120b HMA creates two groups: full-attention and sliding-window, shown in Figure 1. With the HMA disabled, these groups collapse into a single full-attention buffer requiring keeping the full attention in memory for all layers. While the model still saves on compute (since SWA layers only compute on a fixed-size window), the memory saving is thrown away.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
vLLM's HMA handles this heterogeneity by splitting the cache into groups, one per attention type, and managing each independently - so a sliding-window group can evict old blocks that a full-attention group must keep for the whole prompt. For gpt-oss-120b that means two groups, full-attention and sliding-window (Figure 1). Disable HMA and the groups collapse into a single full-attention buffer: every layer is now sized for full attention, and even though SWA layers still save compute, the memory saving is gone.
```

<div style={{textAlign: 'center', margin: '20px 0'}}>
  <img src="/img/blogs/hybrid-models/hma-blog-image1.webp" alt="Per-group offloading" style={{width: '85%', height: 'auto'}} />
  <p style={{fontSize: '0.9em', marginTop: '8px'}}><em>Figure 1. Per-group offloading: full-attention keeps every block, sliding-window keeps only its window.</em></p>
</div>

### Handling Hybrid KV by an Offloading Connector

> Prior to our changes, an offloading connector built for the uniform world handles a hybrid cache in one of two bad ways: Either forgo offloading altogether or forgo the use of HMA. The second is not a failure but a silent slowdown: vLLM falls back to managing offloading uniform attention blocks and offloading requests succeed, but the GPU memory savings are lost, and every KV load ends up moving more data than it should.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A connector built for the uniform world has only two ways to handle a hybrid cache, and both are bad: skip offloading entirely, or keep offloading but force HMA off. The second is the dangerous one - not a failure, but a silent slowdown. Offloading still succeeds, so nothing looks wrong, but with HMA disabled every layer is treated as full-attention: the GPU memory savings are lost, and each KV load moves far more data than it should. We closed that gap.
```

Making the connector genuinely HMA-aware came down to the following changes:

> * **Per-group tensor subsets.** vLLM makes the connector aware of which tensors belong to which group and their layer type. Lookups of blocks in the connector are also group aware.
> * **Per-group offloads.** Rather than offloading a single KV block for a chunk of tokens, each group of layers offloads its separate KV data. In storage, this amounts to a separate file per group. For example, in gpt-oss this means two files per chunk instead of one, which the I/O pool can move in parallel.
> * **Partial transfers.** Some groups only require partial loading of KV data. Sliding-window layers need only the KV of the last tokens in a prompt, so the connector transfers only the in-window blocks. In the case of storage, this often starts from an offset partway into a file rather than the beginning of the file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Per-group awareness.** vLLM makes the connector aware of which tensors belong to which group and their layer type. Lookups of blocks in the connector are also group aware.
* **Per-group offloads.** Rather than offloading a single KV block for a chunk of tokens, each group of layers offloads its separate KV data. In storage, this amounts to a separate file per group. For example, in gpt-oss this means two files per chunk instead of one, which the I/O pool can move in parallel.
* **Partial transfers.** Some groups need only part of their KV. A sliding-window layer needs just the last tokens in the prompt, so the connector transfers only the in-window blocks - on storage, often starting from an offset partway into a file rather than its beginning.
```

> We built these changes into the vLLM native offloading connector and llm-d FS connector, handling both the CPU and storage tiers. This allows vLLM to use HMA along with the connector and, as shown below, leads to significant performance improvements.

Reviewer 4: and **the** llm-d FS connector

Author: Done

## Performance Benefits: Nearly Double the Load Speed

When a request prefix already lives in the offload tier, how fast can we pull it back? We ran a small microbenchmark: run ten distinct 128k-token prompts concurrently. On an initial "cold" pass their KV is written to the offload tier. Then we repeat this on a "hot" pass (with GPU cache disabled) in which the KV data is read back from the offload tier. We measure how long the hot batch takes to complete its KV loads and decode one token for all ten requests (similar to TTFT, but for the whole batch).

<div style={{textAlign: 'center', margin: '20px 0'}}>
  <img src="/img/blogs/hybrid-models/hma-blog-image2.webp" alt="Batch KV load latency across tiers" style={{width: '85%', height: 'auto'}} />
  <p style={{fontSize: '0.9em', marginTop: '8px'}}><em>Figure 2. Batch KV load latency across CPU and storage tiers with HMA and without it. Models are gpt-oss-20b (TP=2) and gpt-oss-120b (TP=4) on NVIDIA H100 GPUs. Block size is 16 tokens for the CPU tier and 256 tokens for the storage tier.</em></p>
</div>

> 

Reviewer 2: Figure 2 caption names CPU and storage tiers but doesn't specify the storage backend. What was it?NVMe / CephFS / IBM Storage Scale ?

Author: IBM Storage Scale (I Added it to the text)

Reviewer 4: probably should go in the caption: 
"on NVIDIA H100 GPUs with IBM Scale Storage."

Author: Done

> When a request prefix already lives in the offload tier, how fast can we pull it back? We ran a small microbenchmark: run ten distinct 128k-token prompts concurrently. On an initial "cold" pass their KV is written to the offload tier. Then we repeat this on a "hot" pass (with GPU cache disabled) in which the KV data is read back from the offload tier. We measure how long the hot batch takes to complete its KV loads and decode one token for all ten requests (similar to TTFT, but for the whole batch).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a request's prefix already lives in the offload tier, how fast can we pull it back? We ran a small microbenchmark on ten distinct 128K-token prompts. A first "cold" pass writes their KV to the offload tier; a second "hot" pass, with the GPU cache disabled, reads it back. We time how long the hot batch takes to load its KV and decode one token across all ten requests - a batch-level analogue to TTFT.
```

The results (in Figure 2) show that HMA-aware reads are **1.8x to 1.9x faster** on both tiers and both model sizes. The source of these benefits is in the sliding window layers that only need to load the last 128 tokens worth of KV cache instead of the full attention for the entire 128K tokens. On the offload side (after initial prefill) we did not see this benefit as we still chose to offload all the KV data. This direction is done asynchronously and thus is less critical.

## Scaling Benefits of HMA-Aware Offloading

> HMA pays off irrespective of offloading, because sizing each group to its real need frees a lot of HBM. For example, for a gpt-oss-120b model, vLLM predicts an increase of **1.77x more KV cache capacity** when turning the HMA configuration flag on (as seen in vLLM's log messages). This is again due to the lower capacity that the sliding window layers take. When testing this with offload tiers underneath, this effect compounds: the GPU can cater to more requests, and similarly, the CPU tier can serve more requests by evicting more non-critical KV data from the sliding-window layers.

Reviewer 2: "GPU can cater to more requests" sounds a bit strange --> GPU can serve more requests
"the lower capacity that the sliding window layers take" --> "the smaller KV footprint of the sliding window layers"

Author: Done

> HMA pays off irrespective of offloading, because sizing each group to its real need frees a lot of HBM. For example, for a gpt-oss-120b model, vLLM predicts an increase of **1.77x more KV cache capacity** when turning the HMA configuration flag on (as seen in vLLM's log messages). This is again due to the smaller KV footprint of the sliding-window layers. When testing this with offload tiers underneath, this effect compounds: the GPU can serve more requests, and similarly, the CPU tier can serve more by evicting more non-critical KV data from the sliding-window layers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HMA pays off irrespective of offloading, because sizing each group to its real need frees substantial HBM. For gpt-oss-120b, vLLM reports a 1.77x increase in KV-cache capacity when the HMA flag is on - again, the smaller footprint of the sliding-window layers. With offload tiers underneath, the effect compounds: the GPU serves more requests, and the CPU tier does the same, since it too can evict the non-critical sliding-window state.
```

To show the scalability of using offloading, we follow the scalability test from our previous post, [Native KV Cache Offloading to Any Filesystem with llm-d](/blog/native-kv-cache-offloading-to-any-file-system-with-llm-d). This test sweeps a growing number of users each sending its own (previously seen) prompt of 16K-token with single-token decode. The test runs at maximum query-per-second rate of 80 and max-concurrency of 80 and measures throughput in tokens per second. As the number of users grows, each configuration eventually saturates its memory capacity and drops to prefill level throughput.

<div style={{textAlign: 'center', margin: '20px 0'}}>
  <img src="/img/blogs/hybrid-models/hma-blog-image3.webp" alt="User scalability test across tiers" style={{width: '85%', height: 'auto'}} />
  <p style={{fontSize: '0.9em', marginTop: '8px'}}><em>Figure 3. User scalability test across tiers with gpt-oss-120b (TP=4) on NVIDIA H100 GPUs, with HMA and without it.</em></p>
</div>

> HMA-awareness produces two positive effects in this experiment, shown in Figure 3. First, it shifts each saturation cliff to the right: the GPU holds more users with HMA before it saturates, and the CPU tier does the same once it takes over. The storage capacity is large enough, so we never hit this cliff. Second, it raises the sustained throughput of the slower tiers: with storage added, the GPU + CPU + storage stack settles onto a much higher plateau than without HMA, and manages to sustain this high throughput to the largest user counts tested.

Reviewer 2: "we never hit this cliff" - this is a bit overstatement no? the dashed purple line does step down around 800 users. Maybe better say something more accurate like  - 
"The storage capacity is large enough that we do not see a collapse to prefill-level throughput in the tested range"

Author: Done

> </div>

Reviewer: Figure 2 caption specifies "IBM Storage Scale as the storage backend" but this caption doesn't mention the storage backend, even though the storage tier is part of this test too. Worth adding for consistency?

Author: Done

  <p style={{fontSize: '0.9em', marginTop: '8px'}}><em>Figure 4. KV cache management across a 16-server gpt-oss-120b fleet (TP=1, one NVIDIA H100 per server): TTFT and throughput vs request rate.</em></p>
</div>

The payoff shows up under load. Past about 20 QPS the GPU-only baseline saturates and its TTFT climbs into the tens of seconds as requests queue. Adding a CPU offload tier helps: at 40 QPS it lifts throughput about **75%** over the baseline while holding TTFT low. But the real win comes from managing both tiers together. With GPU+CPU KV management, **throughput rises roughly 115% over the baseline at 40 QPS, and TTFT stays essentially flat across the whole sweep**.

That gap is llm-d's value: **the offload tier only reaches its full potential when the scheduler knows what it holds and routes to it**. Capacity is a property of an instance; throughput is a property of placement.

The full setup, the per-QPS results, and step-by-step instructions to run it yourself are in the [llm-d tiered prefix cache guide](https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d/tree/main/guides/tiered-prefix-cache#gpt-oss-120b-benchmarking-results).

## What's Next

> The experiments in this post used the standalone llm-d FS connector. Yet the same HMA-aware offloading was also fully implemented in the new multi-tier connector that has been upstreamed into vLLM and will replace the standalone connector going forward. See the [vLLM KV offloading guide](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/features/kv_offloading_usage/). The multi-tier design is more than just packaging. With CPU and storage managed as tiers of one connector, CPU serves as a hub for hot data and a staging area for slower storage.

Reviewer 2: Maybe change a bit phrasing - 
The same HMA-aware offloading path has also been implemented in the new multi-tier connector upstreamed to vLLM, which is intended to replace the standalone connector going forward.
Can you link the PR?

Author: Done — rephrased as suggested. I left out a PR link since the upstream multi-tier connector landed across several PRs rather than a single one, so the [vLLM KV offloading guide](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/features/kv_offloading_usage/) is the better reference point for readers.

The HMA results here rely on canonical KV-cache allocation for HMA models in vLLM ([PR #37885](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/pull/37885)), so reproducing them needs a vLLM build that includes it.

> 

Reviewer: Heads up — this PR is still open/unmerged as of today. The current wording ("needs a vLLM build that includes it") is technically accurate but a reader might assume it's already in a released version. Might be worth making it explicit that the PR hasn't landed yet so people know they'd need to build from that branch to reproduce.
